How many Americans
do you think live in a wildfire risk zone?
The answer?
A third of the U.S. population.
This number used to be 1 in 6.
And fire season is only growing.
Now to the dry and hot conditions
fueling dozens of wildfires in the West.
This fire burning so hot it's
creating its own erratic weather system.
This fire, just one of hundreds
burning across North America right now.
On average, a whole month has been added
to fire season
in parts of the Western U.S.
It starts earlier.
It goes longer.
We can have fires any time of the year.
Fire season is now fire year.
Right now, across the American West,
as we're entering
some of the worst fire conditions
we've ever faced this season,
we also have some of the lowest staffing
that we've ever had
for a wildland firefighters.
That's a recipe for disaster.
And while the
government does share some wildfire data,
it doesn't always tell the story
on the ground.
Specifically, around the health
and well-being of those protecting
the most rural parts of America:
the wildland firefighters.
Working 16 hour days in extreme heat.
Sleeping in smoke.
Breathing smoke.
That takes a toll on your body.
So what does it take for wildland
firefighters to battle
these increasingly intense fires?
And how can communities across
rural America protect themselves?
We're seeing the greatest
relative increase in acres
burned above elevations at 8000ft.
If you are a firefighter in the 90s,
you might say,
oh, you know that area can't burn.
And now we're seeing those areas
burn really vigorously.
Climate change,
which is driving higher temperatures
and drier conditions, is one component.
The human factor is another.
85% of wildfires are started by humans.
So where humans live and recreate.
Like hiking, camping and traveling.
Matter.
People are moving outside of urban centers
more into the hazardous
wildfire prone areas.
But when I started fighting fires
in the 70s,
there weren't that many rural subdivisions
in the woods.
Bobby is referring
to the expansion of what is known
as the wildland urban Interface or WUI.
The WUI is the zone of transition
where houses and buildings are built close
to unoccupied wildland areas,
creating zones of high wildfire risk.
You've really exacerbated the problem
because you put all this
flammable material in and all these points
of ignitions with these homes.
But do people know the actual risks
of living in the WUI?
People aren't very concerned
because they think the fire department
is going to come save them.
But when the weather and climate and
fuel and everything goes against them,
there's not much anybody's
going to do against a large fire.
So the biggest thing is getting people
to understand the stresses
on a traditional seasonal fire
service has grown immensely.
The time away from home,
the amount of work that you have to do,
the duration, the smoke accumulation
that firefighters go through.
We're having a lot more wildland fires
that become wildland urban interface
fires.
People are realizing that,
hey, I'm breathing this smoke.
You know, 100 homes on fire, you know,
with their plastics and their thousands
of different chemical compounds.
Wildland firefighters are exposed to 31
carcinogens in the line of duty.
It's extremely difficult to staff
crews of wildland firefighters now
because the difficulty of the conditions
they're facing has outpaced
their compensation.
What does it take to support them?
It takes healthcare so that the people
with the expertise to manage
these fires will keep working
and stay healthy doing so.
Protecting and properly
compensating wildland firefighters
is a critical piece of the equation.
But there's also education and awareness,
which we'll get back to
right after this message.
This is another episode
in a series of videos we're doing on
how emergency help gets to remote places.
Rural parts of the U.S.
often struggle to get the same services
as more populated regions.
We wanted to explore
what those challenges look like
and what might be done
to make things better.
And thanks to our sponsor, T-Mobile,
for supporting this video.
T-Mobile is now the best
mobile network in the U.S.
according to Ookla Speedtest,
and continues to be committed
to supporting first responders
and their families with exclusive deals.
You can learn more at the link below.
T-Mobile
didn't dictate the content of this video,
but their support did make our reporting
possible.
Now back to the video.
We're trying to help
everyone understand you can do things
around your own property.
Sometimes it's firescaping.
Lois is referring
to fire adapted communities,
a framework for educating communities
to be fire resilient.
Start right around your home.
Do the 0 to 5ft zone.
Make sure that that's as safe
as it can be.
These zones refer to defensive buffers
between houses
and wildfires.
And the first zone of defense:
Homeowners should clear their gutters
and remove firewood,
debris, and other flammable materials.
In the second zone,
they should design landscaping
to create breaks
with smaller clusters of trees and shrubs.
Bob Roper and his colleagues
have also developed
a program called ready, set, go to help
fire departments and vulnerable residents
learn what to do before, during
and after a fire.
And I think the public should,
you know, really think about the future.
Think about how they want to be protected
by the fire service, by contextualizing
the fact that, you know,
we haven't seen the worst fire
we're going to continue to see ever
increasing larger fires, more destructive.
I think it's more important than ever
for people
to think about fire,
not as a singular thing, but fire plural.
The most resilient tool
we have to fight fires in the U.S.
utilizes indigenous fire
practices of controlled burns.
There are also kinds of fire
that a lot of our ecosystems
in California, but all across North
America evolved to thrive with.
And if we can bring back
the good kinds of fire,
the kinds of fires that these ecosystems
need,
then we can really make our landscapes
more resilient.
We can do the fuel mitigation,
we can remove the fuel.
But the research shows that prescribed
fire really has to happen.
While
the state of California has partnered
with the Karuk in Klamath Tribes
to practice controlled burns,
it's only one small step
to fighting these growing fires.
Addressing climate change,
encouraging fire, safe rural planning
and increasing support for wildland
firefighters will be just as critical.
For.